---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "What Makes Bengal Bangla?"
author: oindrila.ghosh
cover: 394_baul-singers-sml.jpg
tags: society
date: 2019-10-15
link: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/7c/394_baul-singers-sml.jpg
disable-first-letter: False
---
This year, on our (India’s) Independence Day, a group of my friends were talking
about the celebrations when one of them mentioned that he feels that Bengalis
are the most patriotic of all in India. I had never really given this a lot of
thought before but the comment got me thinking: do we Bengalis really put our
country before everything? Do we put India before Bengal?

I have always lived in the state of West Bengal, India. Now that I am studying
in Goa with people of different backgrounds and from different states, I see a
lot of differences between our culture and that of the rest of the country.
While we do share similar sentiments of pride towards our culture as the other
Indian states, the way our love for our traditions and heritage finds
manifestation is wildly different from anywhere else, possibly in the whole
world. For the longest time, India has taken pride in its diversity. The country
seeks unity in acknowledging, respecting and preserving the diversity in
culture, lineage and heritage. When politicians come up with ideas involving
linguistic homogenization of the country, India and her people respond with
passionate protests. 

Language, an integral part of an ethnic group’s culture and an essence of their
non-material heritage, is a powerful political tool. It has the power to unify
nations like it did for Italy and Germany and on the other hand, create
conflicts like Catalonia and Spain. Language has been a central factor in the
demarcation of states in India. The ethno-linguistic divisions are definitely
not perfect for there exists over a hundred languages and more of their dialects
in the country. As a result, the political map of India is forever changing with
Telangana being born in 2014 and the fight for the Nepali majority Darjeeling
district of West Bengal’s fight for a separate state, Gorkhaland, still being
on. 

The way Bengalis feel about their language is slightly different though. They
have never been afraid of giving up their lives to preserve their
mother-language, Bangla (or Bangali as non-Bengalis would call it). Unlike
France and groups of Gandhian ideologues, Bengalis do not seek to elevate their
mother-tongue to a higher pedestal only to counter the supremacy of English
(colonial language for the Indians). It is our love for our language,
literature, art and so on and so forth that make us do so, all thanks to the
Bangali Renaissance of the 1700s-1900s. 

In 1947, when British India was partitioned into the Republic of India and the
Islamic Republic of Pakistan right before their independence from colonial rule,
East Bengal became East Pakistan, solely because of the fact that it was home to
a majority of the Muslim population. Besides, the 200 years of the British
colonial policy of 'Divide and Rule' had proven to be remarkably efficacious,
resulting in alienating and pitting the Hindus and Muslims against each other in
the erstwhile state of Bengal. This helped in the Partition of Bengal into East
and West Bengal by the then British viceroy, Lord Curzon in 1905. Various
movements sprung up against the partition. Famous freedom fighter and future
Nobel-laureate, Rabindranath Tagore encouraged the celebration of
Raksha-Bandhan, a Hindu festival to honour the bond between a brother and a
sister, between Hindus and Muslims instead. Songs celebrating the unity between
the two religions found popularity as battle-cries of the energetic protests
against the actions of the English. However, Indians failed to stop what in my
personal opinion has been one of the most strategic ways to destroy Bengal’s
unity and a future as a unified state. The Partition of Bengal was later
annulled in 1911 but the province was never to be the same again.

India was similarly partitioned, yet again, right before the transfer of power
in 1947. East Bengal was handed over to Prime Minister Jinnah’s Pakistan in a
platter that year. 55% of Pakistan’s population resided in East Pakistan and
yet, the distant minority residing in West Pakistan was to rule over them. This
lead to a great deal of resentment and problems, and they were not just limited
to the communication issues resulting from the uncomfortable fact that the two
halves of the country were separated by the state of India. Urdu was to be given
the status of the national language, effectively making it a language superior
to East Pakistan’s beloved mother-tongue Bangla. The Bangladesh Liberation
Movement, which finally concluded with the birth of yet another country,
Bangladesh in 1971, found momentum because of the Bangali population’s love for
their *Bangaliayana*- the Bangali culture.

Dhaka University played a central role in this movement. No wonder it had to see
blood spilt multiple times. One of the most shocking incidents of this movement,
fuelled by the love for Bangla also happens to be one of those incidents that
Bangalis, across borders, hold very close to heart. It took place on February
21st, 1952, when 4 students of Dhaka University were killed by the Pakistani
forces for opposing the sole use of Urdu in educational institutions across the
Bangali majority region. Today, the UN commemorates this day (21st of February)
as the International Mother Language Day every year. Every Bangali looks back at
this massacre with pride and respect because it symbolises the fact that their
love for their language is stronger than anything else can ever be.   

Historically, Bangalis have always been a very politically active culture. They
have never shied away from a revolution. The fact that most revolutionaries of
the Independence Movement were Bangali bears testimony to this fact. Even today,
West Bengal finds itself amidst protests and revolutions against what it
considers wrong throughout the year. It has already witnessed the *Doctor’s
Revolution* and the protest against ABVP and RSS’s Hindutva-centric actions in
Jadavpur University this year itself. People of West Bengal’s love for
revolutions, change and socialism lies in stark contrast to the political
compass of most of the other parts of India.

Sentimental views of how Bangladesh and the Bangali majority regions of India
ought to be a single country has existed for quite some time now. In fact, Prime
Minister Clement Attlee of UK predicted that Bengal would want to be united
under a single banner- it would want to rise above the religious demarcations
that virtually defined the rest of the country and unify for the love of Bangla
in 1946. HS Suhrawardy, the then premier of Bengal explained his stance in
support of an 'independent, undivided and sovereign Bengal' and appealed to the
masses on April 27th of 1947:

*“Let us pause for a moment to consider what Bengal can be if it remains united.
It will be a great country, indeed the richest and the most prosperous in India
capable of giving to its people a high standard of living, where a great people
will be able to rise to the fullest height of their stature, a land that will
truly be plentiful. It will be rich in agriculture, rich in industry and
commerce and in the course of time it will be one of the most powerful and
progressive states of the world. If Bengal remains united this will be no dream,
no fantasy.”*

Besides the appeal to the Bangali exceptionalism, left-wingers supported this
cause, blaming all of Bengal’s ills on the non-Bangali capitalists. GD Birla was
quoted saying: “I am in favour of separation, and I do not think it is
impracticable or against the interest of Hindus” as early as 1942, on behalf of
the Marwari business community in Kolkata. If only the plan for Bengal
unification had been all about catering to the sole interests of Hindus. 

Even MA Jinnah supported the cause instead of wanting Bengal for Pakistan
although he had a slightly different reasoning, stating: “what is the use of
Bengal without Calcutta?” The most influential supporter of the plan to make
Bengal a separate nation was Sarat Chandra Bose, a popular congressman and the
elder brother of the celebrated freedom fighter, Subhash Chandra Bose. The
proposal for United Bengal involved equal quotas for Hindus and Muslims in the
military and the police, which were to be indigenised and 'manned by Bangalis'.
The plan that was eventually made public on May 24th of 1947, 10 days before the
final Partition plan was announced, provided for a Hindu-Muslim coalition
Government in Unified Bengal. The Prime Minister was to be a Muslim and the Home
Minister a Hindu. However, the Hindu-Muslim riots in Kolkata around the same
time and the open opposition to the unification of Bengal by Sardar Vallabhai
Patil, Jawaharlal Nehru and later even Gandhiji, eventually led to this plan
being discarded. 

The reason why most non-Bangali Indian leaders failed to support the idea of the
formation of a third country is because they thought that it would lay down a
precedent for other states to follow and demand independence. On May 27th, 1947,
Nehru made a formal declaration that he would support the unification only if
Bengal was to remain as a part of the Indian Union. This sparked a response from
the last British Governor of Bengal, Sir Frederick Burrows: “Bengal will be
sacrificed at the altar of Nehru’s all-India outlook.” 

The sentiments did not, however, die with the failure of the plan to unify
Bengal in 1947. The Brihot Bangla or Bishal Bangla Movement (Greater Bengal
Movement) is a nationalist political ideology which seeks to unite all bangali
speaking regions of today’s India, Bangladesh and Myanmar into a single nation.
If I am to draw an analogy (although it is very difficult to find one for it is
as unique as it can possibly get), I would say that it is like Kurdistan. The
Kurds are a nation without a state. The Bangalis too are unified by their
language but not by land. bangali literature has always referred to their
country as 'Bangla', the same word as they use to refer to their language.
However, Bangla does not refer to either India or Bangladesh, it refers to the
Unified Bengal. So yes, Bangalis are patriotic. But, they are patriotic towards
Bangla before any country.

While Nehru thought Bengal was just like other Indian states and that the
unification of Bengal and a consequent separate state would result in similar
sentiments in other states like Tamil Nadu, I disagree. The sentiments are
stronger among Bangalis because half of our own state (or country, for a
Bangladeshi) is a separate country. People from West Bengal have grown up with
stories of Bangla and how some of our ancestors had to cross borders during the
Partition and how they still long to go back.

The nostalgia, the resentment of the Hindu-Muslim divide and the love for
Bangla, both the language and the motherland keeps the emotions and nationalist
sentiments alive even today. For every Bangali, half of their identity lies in
West Bengal and the remaining half lies in Bangladesh. For every Bangali,
language is the identity- not religion, not dialects but Bangla. Whether or not
we are destined to ever be unified is a question yet to be answered. What
doesn’t change is the fact that even though we do not have a separate country of
Bangla, we are still unified as Bangalis.



*Want to learn the language of Bengal?* Join over 5 million language learners and
[learn with Ling](https://ling-app.com/learn-bengali/)!
