---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "Doxxing: Everything You Should Know About Not Falling Victim"
author: tech.warn
cover: doxxing.jpg
tags: sponsored
date: 2021-01-05
link: "https://thehillnews.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/lighted_server.jpg"
disable-first-letter: false
---
<p>Doxxing has been around for a long time. You might have been a victim of doxxing – on a smaller or larger scale – and you didn't even know it.</p><p>In this piece, we discuss what doxxing is and what you can do to prevent it from happening in the first place.</p><p><strong >What is Doxxing?</strong></p><p>Also known as doxxing, it refers to a specific form of cyber-attack where an internet user's details are revealed and made publicly available.&nbsp;</p><p>Doxing often occurs as a personal attack launched on a specific internet user to make them uncomfortable in their own homes. It is also a way to let the internet user know that they are not safe from their attacker's reach, no matter where they might go.</p><p><strong >How to prevent doxxing</strong></p><p>The truth about doxxing is that nothing you didn't put out there will be found. Thus, it can be prevented in its entirety if you know what you are doing.</p><p>Some of the ways to keep off the radar of this damaging attack include:</p><p><strong >Watching Social Media Activity</strong></p><p>Social media is an information mine that you are not considering as much as you should be.</p><p>From constant updates, picture uploads, random tweets, and more, you might be letting on bits and pieces of personal information which could be pieced together to uncover your identity online. Here, details such as your email address, home address, personal cell number, and more can be revealed.</p><p>Do well to limit the kind of information that you share online. If possible, make your social media accounts private such that only friends and family can follow your updates.</p><p><strong >Masking your IP Address</strong></p><p class="ql-align-justify">The internet works on <a href="https://www.wpbeginner.com/glossary/ip-address/" rel="noopener noreferrer" target="_blank" ><strong>a system of IP addresses</strong></a> which are uniquely assigned to each computer. Just like a physical address, the IP address is used to approximate or pinpoint the location where your computer is accessing the internet from.</p><p>In other words, anyone with access to your IP address information can extract where you are reaching the web from. Hence, they have your location also.</p><p>A good measure against this is to use the Tor browser or get <a href="https://www.expressvpn.com" rel="noopener noreferrer" target="_blank" ><strong>a VPN app to protect your identity online</strong></a>. Both services are excellent for assigning a new IP address to you whenever you access the web. Thus, anyone tracking you will always be sent on a wild goose chase.</p><p><strong >Preventing Packet Sniffing</strong></p><p>In other words, make sure your internet network is as secure as it can be.</p><p>Otherwise, the hacker can break the Wi-Fi protocols and access the computers on that network. From there, there is no limit to the amount of personal information that they can get on you.</p><p>An excellent place to start here is to <a href="https://www.inc.com/comcast/risks-of-using-public-wifi.html" rel="noopener noreferrer" target="_blank" ><strong>avoid public and free Wi-Fi networks altogether</strong></a>. When on a personal router network also, ensure the best practices at all times.</p><p>This is a sponsored article from TechWarn.</p><p></p>